Face recognition is one of the most promising field of
computer vision. Recognize a face and verifying a person
automatically from images, known as face recognition system
[1]. Face recognition plays an important role in our regular
life. In a passport checking, ATM, credit card, voter
verification, smart door, criminal or terrorist investigation and
many other purposes face recognition is widely used to
authenticate a person automatically and accurately. For those
reasons, face recognition is the most popular than any other
Biometric techniques.

Abstract— This paper represents an implementation of
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on masked and non-
masked face recognition. Security is an essential term in our
today’s life. In various Biometric technology, face recognition is
widely used to secure any system because it is better than any
other traditional techniques like PIN, password, fingerprint etc.
and most reliable to identify or verify a person efficiently. In
recent years, face recognition is a very challenging task because
of different occlusion or masks like the existence of sunglasses,
scarves, hats and different types of make-up or disguise
ingredients. The accuracy rate of face recognition is influenced
by these types of masks. Many algorithms have been developed
recently for non-masked face recognition which are widely used
and give better performance. Still in the field of masked face
recognition, few contributions has been done. Therefore, in this
work a statistical procedure has been selected which is applied
in non-masked face recognition and also apply in the masked
face recognition technique. PCA is more effective and successful
statistical technique and widely used. For this reason in this
work, PCA algorithm has been chosen. Finally, a comparative
study also done here for a better understanding.

In all automated personal identification system, face
recognition has gained much attention as a unique Biometric
recognition technique. For protecting the assets of many
industries in the world are now trying to implement this
authentication technique in their organizations. Throughout
the world, many of the governments also interested to secure
the public places such as railway stations, airports and bus
stations etc. by using face recognition system. However for
poor recognition rate, in real time recognizing remain

Keywords—Face recognition, PCA algorithm, Eigen face,
Eigen value, Masked face.

Mad. Sabbir Ejaz

 

Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
Bangladesh Army University of Engineering and Technology

 

Md. Rabiul Islam

Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering

Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technology
Datchah: Danaledaah

unsuccessful. Recognition rate depends on quality of image.
Recognition rate decreases for noisy and low quality image.
That’s why pre-processing is needed for better recognition
rate. Some pre-processing techniques like cropping, resizing,
sharpening, de-noising, normalizing, enhancing are used in
face recognition process [2]. Recently many algorithms have
been developed for reliable face recognition. Different
techniques depend on different methods and they have
different recognition accuracy. All of these algorithms,
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) gives a better accuracy
rate in normal or non-masked face recognition [3]-[5].

In present days masked face recognition is more important.
Mainly terrorists and criminals covered their face with mask
for disguise. Besides this, sunglass, hat, color festoon etc. also
act like mask. Using different types of masks or occlusions the
key features to identify a person is decreasing. Lower numbers
of face features in the masked face cause difficulties than other
normal face recognition technique [6]. Consequently the
accuracy rate of recognition is decreasing. That’s why masked
face is being one of the majors concerned factor in the field of
face recognition. Figure 1 shows some of masked faces.

Fig. 1. Human faces with different types of masks.

For face recognition, at first we need to detect the face
from image. After detecting face, we can recognize the person.

It is easy for human to detect a face but harder for a system to
detect face. For this reason at first we need to train the system
for detect face portion from images. Here we use Viola-Jones
algorithm to detect face from an image. Viola-Jones algorithm
detect face using machine learning approach from any digital
image [7]. After detecting face from input image, then we use
PCA algorithm for feature extraction from image, which are
used for training.

Figure 2 demonstrate our proposed method to the problem
of robust face recognition under mask and non-mask
conditions. For face recognition at first detect the face portion
from an image, find out the face features and finally train a
system for face recognition. During the training phase, for
detecting face portion we used Viola-Jones algorithm in our
work and then PCA is used to efficiently represent the gallery
images. In this way we obtain a PCA feature space which is
called Eigen faces or ghost face. In the test case, a target face
image (which can be masked or not) is given to be recognized.
At first its PCA representation is computed. As a result,
potential facial components are identified. Then, the Eigen
faces are selected and used for recognition. The recognition is
carried out by comparing the selected features from the target
image against selected features from the corresponding
template images. The nearest neighbor (NN) classifier
distance is taken for the recognition.

Fig. 2. Flow chart of face recognition process using PCA.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents our
face detection and face recognition methodology. Section 2
describes about face recognition process. Section 3 signifies
dataset. Section 4 shows experimental results and section 5
draws conclusions.

This work also presents a statistical difference of accuracy
between masked face recognition and non-masked face
recognition using the most successful algorithm Principal
Component Analysis. All the result are shown in both
graphically and tabulated form.

From a digital image or video sources identify or verify a
person automatically by comparing facial features is called
face recognition. Using various algorithms, features are
extracted and then perform comparison between training
image and test image for recognize a face.

Image acquisition is the first stage of face recognition
system. After obtaining the images, different methods of
processing can be applied on the image. If the image has not
been acquired correctly then the desired tasks are difficult to
achieve. In this work we use faces from a database named
ORL Database and some of our own captured images. We mix
up our own masked and non-masked images to the database
to enlarge the dataset so that our work is more reliable and
efficient.

After acquiring the images, the first work is to segment
out the face for further processing. We choose Viola-Jones
face detection algorithm for detecting face region. Then
implemented it in the MATLAB library to automatically
segment the face region. Some of our face images quality are
not much better as we needed. Up to expectation this face
detector fails to detect face region in image. Faces which are
heavily disguised or most of the important facial features are
covered are subjects to fail detect face region. Every face
image is normalized and apply image enhancement methods,
so to achieve better results. This set of enhanced face images
are therefore used to perform further experiments and
evaluations.

Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is an important
statistical procedure and also defined as an orthogonal linear
transformation. This algorithm emphasizes variation and
brings out strong patterns in a dataset. It is used to minimize a
big dataset to a small dataset still contains almost all the
information as large dataset. PCA finds the data mean and
principal components. It is popular as dimension reduction
procedure. The technique is usually used for maximizing
variance and seizing strong patterns of features in a dataset [8].
It was introduced by Karl Pearson in 1901. PCA is an effective
statistical method.

For correlated data, Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
works well. An image is also a highly correlated data. Hence
extracting features from images, PCA performs better.
Performing different operations on image matrix, it is
transformed to a lower dimensional Eigen subspace. There
after find out the covariance matrix from the lower dimension
matrix. Relative variance between pixels in an image are
represented by covariance matrix. Afterward Eigen vectors
are calculated from this covariance matrix. Eigen vectors
with the highest Eigen values are considered as the principal
components.

Basically a set of eigenvector is called Eigen face which is
used for face recognition of human. Eigen face extract the
main feature from image and major Eigen face is selected for
face recognition. In face recognition, Eigen face is used for
represent the face image efficiently by principal component
analysis. Images can be reconstructed as like as original image
from a few number of weights and pictures [10]. Eigen face in
a face recognition system must be less or equal to the total size
of dataset. In figure 3 shows some of Eigen faces.

Eigenvalue and eigenvector comes from German word
“Eigen” that means “Characteristic”. In a square matrix
eigenvalue is a scalar that represent by 4, which is a Greek
letter. Eigenvector is represented by small letter x and it is a
non-zero vector [9]. Here is an equation which is satisfied
by all eigenvector and eigenvalue. Here, S is a given square
matrix.

For face recognition we need to train a dataset and then
apply Principal Component Analysis on train dataset step by
step. At first, we have to convert train dataset into face vector.
Each 2D (p by q) train image is converted into 1D (pq by 1)
face vector. After converting all images, they are loaded which
is called dataset. In this research work, total images K= 12

Fig. 3. Some Eigen faces.

A huge calculation need in a large matrix and to solve this
problem, eigenvalue and eigenvector method is used.

Steps of Principal Component Analysis algorithm aré
mentioned below-

Step 5: Calculate Eigen vectors and Eigen values

Step 2: Calculate mean value of data

Step 4: Calculate Covariance matrix

Step 1: Input data

Step 3: Subtract the mean value from each input data

Step 6: Finding the greatest eigenvalue(s)

Step 7: Calculate Weight

(face of our dataset). Here K depends on the number of train
images and J is a variable which loads all images.

After load the dataset next procedure is to calculate
verage or mean face. Here average face is X.

Then, subtract the mean face from each image of the
dataset which is called normalization. Here , is a variable
which stores the result of normalization. Then new matrix D
is generated,

After normalizing, we get a normalized face vector. Then
we calculate covariance matrix of normalized vector.

Covariance matrix C is a large square matrix. For efficient
and accurate calculation eigenvalue and eigenvector is
calculated for reducing a huge face space vector. For
recognition, we need to calculate weight which is compared
with test image weight.

Here, w = weight, 1 = eigenvector, I = face and X = average
face.

In this work ORL face database [13] is used, which
contains a set of faces taken between April 1992 and April
1994 at the Olivetti Research Laboratory in Cambridge, UK.
This dataset contains 10 different images of 40 individuals.
The files are in PGM format. Each image size is 92x112, 8-
bit grey levels. For masked faces we created masked face
images dataset using ORL face image and our own captured
images. In this experiment, total 500 images used. 300 as a
training image and 80-200 images used as test images on
different test cases. Figure 4 shows some dataset images of
our experiments. All the work done using MATLAB. Here
use image processing toolbox of MATLAB 2017a version on
windows platform.

Proposed methodology is applied on our dataset images
and found the resultant images. First step of face recognition
is created a training dataset which contains pre-processed
input images. After creating training set, average face is
calculated for normalized training set. For normalize the
dataset, subtracting an average face from each original face.
Figure 5 shows the normalized faces of original face image.
Then calculate the Eigen face which are shown in figure 6.
Finally test some images for recognition. Here create some
masked face images and also test them if it can be recognized

the person properly. Both masked and non-masked face
testing images shown in figure 7.

Fig. 4. Some example images from training dataset.

Fig. 6. Some Eigen faces

Fig. 5. Some normalized faces

Fig. 7. Testing (a) Masked face and (b) Non-Masked face

A statistical comparison between masked face recognition
and non-masked face recognition using PCA algorithm shown
in table-I. This table shows the recognition accuracy of both
masked and non-masked face images. A _ graphical
representation also shown in figure 8 for a better data
visualization.

TABLE I. MASKED AND NON-MASKED FACE RECOGNITION ACCURACY

Fig. 8. Graphical representation of both masked and non-masked face
recognition accuracy

This paper analyzed non-masked face recognition and
masked face recognition accuracy using Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) to recognize a person. It is
proved that, a face without mask gives better recognition rate
in PCA based face recognition system. But when a person is
wearing mask, facial recognition gives poor recognition rate.
It is found that extracting feature from a masked face is less
than non-masked face. Because of missing features for
wearing mask which decrease the recognition rate. Finally,
we conclude that traditional statistical algorithm Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) is better for normal face
recognition but not for masked face recognition. So in the
future, our concern to improve the accuracy of masked face
recognition using other sophisticated machine learning
methods.

From the above table, accuracy of masked face image
recognition is on average 72% where non-masked face is on
average 95%. So PCA gives poor recognition rate for masked
face images rather than non-masked faces.

VII. REFERENCES

